Welcome to exercise number 17
which is called Avoid Damaging Fees.
So, in this exercise
we're gonna calculate how much money fees
can really cost us in the long run.
Then after this exercise
we'll discuss how to avoid paying
these ridiculous fees
and just how to get much better performance too.
Please go to exercise number 17
where we're going to calculate
how damaging fees can be to our portfolio
and the bottom line message here
is that I want to impress upon you the fact
that if you invest in lower fee-based products
like ETFs instead of mutual funds,
you can save a fortune in the long run.
Okay, so, in this example as always
we only enter in information in the white cells
and we're gonna calculate
how damaging an investment vehicle can be
to our net worth that has high fees.
Okay, so the annual fee
is three percent in this case.
Monthly savings, 300 bucks.
Number of years, 50.
And the return rate before fees
is eight percent, so the fees are three percent.
Okay.
Here's the bottom line message,
Excel in English right here,
so it looks like it's gonna cost us a fortune
in fees to invest in this fund,
so that small three percent fee,
I know it seems very small
but it's actually gonna cost us
almost $1.6 million or 1.6 million,
whatever currency it is you're using
and if you want to see the math here,
without the fee of three percent,
I just calculate the return based on the future value
of the rate of eight percent,
the number of payments or periods I should say
being 50 years,
times 12 'cause there's a payment every month
and then here I've got the actual payment amount
which is 300
and here for the interest rate we divide by 12
'cause it's on a monthly basis.
Now, the only difference is this,
watch this, I'm gonna deduct from here the fees.
Okay, see here?
I'm deducting the fees
and that's why it's a very, very damaging impact
to your portfolio.
It's almost criminal.
Okay.
Next up, using the white cells here
calculate what a three percent fee
can cost us after 50 years
and then what we'll do is we'll make it just 50 basis points
or .5 of a percent,
so it's a little bit different,
so we'll do, let's see here,
it's gonna be return before fees of 3.5%,
three percent fee, okay, watch this
and the monthly savings is gonna stay at 300 bucks,
50 years times 12 months, right?
And then 3.5.
Amazing, just amazing.
Look at that impact.
That additional fee is gonna cost us 283 bucks,
crazy, crazy, I hope you understand that.
If that doesn't make sense to you,
please let me know.
All right, number three, the last question.
We're gonna do the same thing.
We're going to say a three percent fee
that has returns of 15% before fees,
so three percent, 15,
300, 50.
Staggering.
The cost here in fees,
that fee is 29.7 million bucks.
Incredible, incredible.
Okay, good, now that you understand the impact
that fees can have on your portfolio
and this is not an exact science
but I just wanted you to get the general idea,
now that you understand,
what we'll do is very soon
we're going to go through and create
a very diversified portfolio
and what we'll do is we'll add stocks,
bonds, commodities, real estate investment trusts
and all through ETFs
so that you can understand
how low the fees are that we're gonna pay
and how much money we'll save in the long run
and by the end of this course you'll see
that I don't ever recommend paying
more than half a percent in fees
and I'll show you exactly where
you get this information from.
Thanks.